A conversation with Mark Epstein: Part 1

[
These are notes from a phone conversation with Mark Epstein, Chairman of the Board of Trustees of The Cooper Union, on February 17, 2013. It was a ~3.5 hour conversation in which we both spoke very candidly, and with Mr. Epstein's permission I am sharing what we both said with the community. Instead of curating or editing in great detail, I thought it would be best to post the notes in their entirety. I apologize for taking over a week at this point. In the interest of transparency, I have uploaded them as quickly as possible without stopping to consider at great length how the whole document presents either one of us overall. 

This is a work in progress, but I felt it was important to post something before Friday's forum (deadline to submit questions is this Thursday morning: bit.ly/Trustee_Qs) in order to make that valuable time more productive. I know it's long, but please try to consider statements in their context without just copy/paste-ing random sentences. My plan was to include a synopsis, but at midnight I am barely able to summarize my work up to this point. I have done my best to summarize Part 1 with excerpts, but it is not a replacement for the entire conversation and I will likely edit it in the next few days. Part 2 summary and full notes will come soon.

These are not 100% accurate and are just my notes from the conversation. [??] generally denotes that something was missed. Words in square brackets were added by me after the fact. changes in topic are separated by a few blank lines. omissions during an excerpt are are denoted by .... jumps in conversation during excerpts are denoted by ||||||| 

EE: Ethan Elenberg

ME: Mark Epstein 

]


EE: First of all I want to thank you for taking the time to talk to me
ME: Its ok, its what Ive been doing, talking to alumni, faculty, its been taking up a bunch of my time lately. but its quite ok, people passionately talk about the school
EE: Part of me was nervous how easy it was to get in touch with you, wondering if I was the only one, but it's good to hear that other people have been trying to get in touch.
ME: It's kind of comical, you know, I meet regularly with student reps and organizations, I dont mean to say I approve them, but its a way for students to have a say, elected student representatives. Now, there are some students who just don't fit into that system, and they expect the Board of Trustees and everyone else to accomodate them personally, we can't do that. I was at a meeting with a student rep, it was myself. Francois De Menil who is the Vice Chairman of the Board of Trustees, another trustee, Jamshed is usually at those meetings but he wasnt at that one that day because he was out of town. and the student said to me "You know, I don't feel like I have access to you." And I said, "What are you talking about? You're sitting here in a meeting with the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman, another trustee, Jamshed would be here if he was in town, Lawrence Ca[??], you can't get higher access. You go try to find a meeting like this at any other school in the country." so when they say somebody doesn't have access and they're telling you that directly to our faces, how do you not laugh at that?"
EE: Well, I definately wasn't aware of that during my time as a student, so I'm glad more people are aware of it now and that word is getting out. I think one of the concerns, as far as open access, is that other public institutions have open board meetings. But that's about the only difference I can see, but you make a valid point when comparing us to other schools.
ME: Most of the places where there is more access in terms of board meetings are public. It's mainly not private institutionos, and we are a private institution.
EE: Right, and the same thing goes for finances...

ME: You know on the board we have 4 elected alumni trustees. those are different from the trustees who happen to be alumni, like myself. about half the board are alumni. but the alumni association puts 4 alumni on the board as alumni trustees and the president of the alumni association also sits on the board.
EE: Right, and he's a voting member, correct?
ME: When you talk about oversight, I mean you can't get better oversight then having 5 [??] that are there on behalf of the alumni association.
EE: Right. Well there have also been issues with the alumni association and its relationship, I guess, to 30 cooper and the alumni office and alumni affairs. I'm not exactly sure how that works, but I know recently there was an email sent out that said "A letter from the alumni" and it was a letter from Peter Cafiero but it didn't represent the alumni association. It was him speaking by himself. So I know that was a whole mess a few months ago.
ME: Ok, well what he said may not have been voted on by the alumni association. it may have been just his personal opinion, but he is the elected president of the alumni association.
EE: well, because-
ME: I don't come out with public statements on my own. whatever my personal opinions are, Im speaking for the Board. It could be the statements of 25 members on the board. If 24 vote for something and I'm the one vote against it, then ... I'm speaking for the Board because that's what the Board has chosen. you have to leave personal stuff out of it. we have people who have felt very strongly about it. I can come out with a statement as Chariman of the Board and maybe it will carry a little weight because I have the title, but  
EE: Because the Alumni Council has twice voted to uphold the mission statement of the school, and then you have Peter Cafiero's email where he's not speaking as the President, he's speaking personally, so it seems like there is a bit of a disconnect there.
ME: Well that might be, but you would have to take that up with the alumni association. thats not part of the BoT. The AA up until sort of recently it had been a completely independent body from the school. But decades ago they had office space offsite, there were dues paid, and it was a completely separate organization. Then in the 70s or something it was decided that the AA should come into the school so they didn't have to pay rent. The employees of the AA became employees of the school so they could get great benefits packages, payroll systems, and this way the money that the AA raised went directly to the school and the school payed for the expenses for the AA.
EE: And is that when the alumni trustees also came in?
ME: They come out of the AA. we have to approve them because, obviously, you don't want some rogue crazy
EE: Right
ME: Not that anything's going to happen, but the AA puts forth alumni for the BoT to explore, its a 4 year term and each year 1 of them takes off as a rolling kind of thing
EE: Right, right, right
ME: So we can approve or disapprove. I don't think there's been a case where we've dissapproved it, but we do have that control.
EE: So did that start in the 70s along with all the other changes, the Physics Department, the sale of Green Camp, and all that?
ME; Well, I don't remember the exact time it started, but it's been that way for a while
EE: Ok
ME: I was originally an alumni trustee, one of the alumni put on by the AA, so it's been around for a couple of decades
EE: Ok, because that brings up a lot of concerns, I guess, with the way things happened in the 70s with the physics dept and I feel like that could have part of the reason for the restructuring of the alumni association. and also the formation of the teacher's unions, I think that was around that time also, or could you correct me on that?
ME: I believe that was also around the 70s, the school then was in a financial crisis. crisis may be too strong of a word, but it became apparent that the school was losing money. and they sold off green camp, but I think what it was that the faculty were looking for certain things that the school didn't feel it could afford. which is why they demonized it. the faculty (I was a student then). I remember having a meeting with Jack White (President at the time) and a bunch of students. he came in and talked to us explaining what was going on. but that was back in the early 70s. Green Camp was sold off because of the financials. 
EE: Right
ME: Look, let me tell you something: people are looking for who to blame, who to hang, there's nobody that deserves everything. but in retrospect, 20/20 hindsight and 40 years of history, I think in the 70s it became apparent that the school couldn't be sustainable forever. and [??] reduce the scholarship from 100% to 90% tuition [??] I would imagine that if people paid 10% over the last 40 years, the school would be in pretty good shape. But what the BoT has done since is what the BoT is trying to do now, which is to find any other means to go ahead without charging tuition, which is to kick the can down the road. I don't blame the board that much becuase there was always hope that we would be able to get out of this, selling off assets, I mean most of us who are on the BoT who are real estate people (a lot of our members come from the real estate world), we dont believe in selling property
EE: Rightly so, I agree with that, and Peter Cooper certainly didnt either
ME: never spoke about the potential of having to charge tuition. everybody said "oh there has to be another way" but even then there was hope that we wouldnt have to, we still have a cushion, we have a capital campaign underway that could have been successful and exceeded expectations, we were doing very well in the stock market until the world collapsed. donations were not doing great. you know, even the alumni who made donations to the annual fund, if you look at it (and add inflation), its gone down. we were bringing in about $2 million 10 years ago. just to keep pace with inflation, that should be $3 million
EE: I remember talking to somebody in Development, about how the numbers have always been fairly low as far as they can look back. do you know how far back that goes? if we have any number for the annual fund before the last capital campaign, before President Campbell?
ME: Sure, I know the last capital campaign because I was involved with it. its goal was raise $15 in the first capital campaign. and expert consultants were brought in, and they said "theres really no way to raise that" with the size of the student body and the lack of capacity of our alumni to give. they said it would be the equivalent of anyone nyu trying to raise $2 billion. nyu churns out more alumni every year then we have total. and a lot of them are wealthier, for a number of reasons. bur we forged ahead and that 1st CC instead of breaking out at $15M got $57M(????) it was an amazing return
EE: Right, and I think-
ME: And the 2nd CC which was a $250M campaign, if you put them side by side and we had seen spectacular results now we could have taken in close to $1 billion. but it hasnt happened. 
EE: Well I think there-
ME: So the current board now is looking at a very short road. that we cant kick the can down. as Chairman of the Board, I dont want to see that happen because that will only lead to an entire collapse. Let me first say categorically that if we had enough money to keep the school as it was completely tuition free, everybody would vote for that. there rumors out there, that we hired jamshed to come in and institute tuition. I almost died laughing. I dont know you all that well, but we're dealing with a number of camps right now. I had last november, november 11th
EE: yes, the meeting where you
ME: I said then-
EE: The "failed investment," yea...
ME: So I said then, a line I attributed to Daniel Moynehan: "everyone's entitled to their own opinion, but not their own facts"
EE: ok
ME: you cant convince someone who is working with their own facts. its almost impossible to respond reasonably and rationally. and theres a whole camp that we have in the cooper community that has done that. theyve made their own facts and are convinced that jamshed was brought in to institute tuition, and you can't talk to them because they don't want to accept the real facts. they dont want to lose their anger, the protests, so they ignore the real facts


EE: ok, so if I have a chance to respond to a few things you said. as far as tuition, if we just started to charge a little bit in the 70s we would be ok, my understanding is those were hard times for a lot of schools, and CUNY for the first time started to charge then, right, and so you're saying if we went the path of CUNY... if we look at the reputations of the 2 schools now I feel like cooper has maintained its prestige throughout the past 40 years whereas CUNY has been in decline, if you compare to what it used to be. that my concern-
ME: Cooper's reputation has declined, it has. whether tuition is part of that, thats another topic, but let me ask something to you. with all this talk of tuition, whether in the 70s or now or anywhere inbetween, the concept was always to charge tuition to those who could afford it. currently in the school about 40% of the school applies for additional financial aid. [??] people cant afford a place to live, let alone tuition. those students in that category, it would still be full tuition there will be financial aid to cover the rest.
EE: but there's a-
ME: Another theoretical point: what was Peter Coopers goal? Was his goal that tuition should be free for everybody, everywhere, no matter what? was he standing outside of Harvard, protesting that they should be giving it away for free? or any other university? no. I think peter coopers goal was that he didnt want a lack of money to be a barrier to education. I think thats what his intention. there were classes who did accept people who were willing to pay. most of the students were poor immigrant kids like himself. they werent coming from wealthy families to go to cooper union because it was free. because the ones who had money would go to the harvards, columbias, etc. And here's another question: people talk about the tax equivalency payments from the chrystler building. Through the years [??] theres always a politician (and it was just in the paper again last week) who says "why should cooper union be getting it?" and if we start charging tuition, it makes a stronger argument to end that
EE: yes
ME: But I see it exactly the opposite. becuase if we charge tuition to those who could afford it, some tuition. and everyone was still getting a minimum of 75% scholarship. if thats the number, lets say 75%. and now the tax dollars that we are getting from the chrystler building and the condos across the street and what we will be getting on the engineering building site, those tax dollars will now be used for their truly intended purpose: to educate people who couldn't otherwise afford it on their own.
EE: That actually
ME: you know why should I give you money if you're going to pay for a surgeon's son from Winsconsin
EE: Yes, I actually saw that in the NYT article, I think it was Houston. But just to answer a few of those things: there are people who argue that if you start to charge some and not others, then that sort of ruins what Cooper is all about. If you look at CUNY, they have their honors program where people get in, it's merit based and they earn it and that's a full scholarship there. I would almost argue that there is an advantage for that son of a surgeon from wherever who has gone through private schools his whole life. He's come from an environment where some people pay and some people don't, and well, "just pass this person through because their parents are paying" or "this person plays sports" or whatever. So I think there is a case for a school where everyone is equal and the only barrier to entry is the quality of the students
ME: Well thats not changing, we're not changing the admissions process to bring in people with money.
EE: Well I mean-
ME: The meritocracy to me is not that everyone is not paying, the meritocracy and the best asset that cooper union has is its students. The student body is not going to change by this. there are a number of students now have the ability to pay something
EE: My concern and my fear is that after this week we are compromising the quality of our students. And I mentioned that in my email, now have changed the admissions process. those students who have applied early-
ME: Do you know why?
EE: Yes, I do
ME: Why did that happen? I want to hear why you think it took place to make sure you have the facts
EE: I suppose I don't have the facts because the wording of the email that got sent to the cooper community made it sound like "The art faculty went back on their proposal in December and therefore we are deferring all the early decision applicants"
ME: Here's the history. In August... Look, I'm not disputing what you're saying, about the faculty and its the [??duty] of [??]... the bottom line is we can't afford that anymore. as I said in the beginning, if we had all the money in the world, wed still be doing what we've been doing. but we can't do it anymore, its impossible. we have to find another way. thats a given, thats a fact. its not an opinion, its a fact. we will go out of business completely unless we start generating revenue somehow. so we knew, and jamshed was 1000% correct by saying, that if we were to impose tuition across the board - everybody - the protesting among students and alumni would be so great that it would ruin the school, that people would not want to come here with that going on. and look at what the mention of tuition has done, as far as creating hysteria, imagaine if we imposed tuition. so what he did, correctly, he went to the faculty. because he knew that if we came up with a plan that the faculty couldn't endorse, it would be mayhem. so we approached the schools, and said "look, these are the target numbers that the schools have to come up with" and the reason we went to each school individually is you can't really expect engineering professors to come up with a plan for the art school and vice versa. so there was no intention of the schools competing against one another. because these are the kinds of things Im hearning from pepole, not so. we went to the 3 schools to come up with a plan. jamshed charged to either  create new programs that are revenue generating, you can make cuts to save money, the cutoff for the engineering school was roughly $6M. and these numbers were not for next year, they could be ramped up over time. the art school was close to $3M and the architecture school was about $2M. in proportion to what it costs, so each school has to be self sufficient [not pay for each other]
EE: Right, so-


ME: We had a board meeting on Dec. 5 where the 3 schools came to present their plans. and we were all very happy that it looked like this was working. now the engineering school has already determined that the probably have to charge undergraduate tuition and they think that 25% tuition would be ok
EE: No, I disagree with that because the faculty neither voted for nor against that proposal
ME: Well, you know, thats a little politics. they voted and it was a tie vote
EE: No, there was a vote for it that failed and there was a vote against it that tied, is what I believe happened
ME: Well, nobody wants to be blamed for saying yes to tuition. you know, thats the reality of it. theres the theory of it that they no they didnt vote for it because it was a tie. the reality is they just dont want to have it be able to be said that they in fact voted on it. so they came up with a plan that included it, and then didn't want to vote on it. and the wording of what they did was bantered[??] about for weeks to get the right term in there: whether it was support it, back it, adopt it, to get the right language
EE: Right, and I think they meant to do that exactly


ME: It was a plan they came up with, working with the consultants who say that if we increase the tuition level by charging 25% tuition we will not affect the student body. if we went to 50% tuition, then it would start affecting the student body, which is not what we want to do. It's funny because I'll tell you another conversation I had: his concernt too, were reducing the quality of the student body. so I wanted to find out what the admissions process is like, to see if this is going to be affected. so I talked to Mitchell Lipton (Dean of Admissions) and I asked him "If we have ~1000 applicants, are they labelled 1-1000 and we take the top 125 so if something happens to student #5 and we have to go to #126, are we in some small way affecting the student body?" and he said "No, that's not the way it works. We invite ~175 students to come to the school every year. They know through experience that about 50 will not accept the invitation. They go to Berklee or Stanford or MIT or somehwere else." I said "Ok, so back to my example: if student #5 gets hit by a bus, and we go to student #176, are we now diminishing the quality of our student body?" He said "No, becuase there is probably a cushion of about another 50 students that no matter which 125 we end up with out of that 225 we are not really diminishing the student body." If you start going to student #500 or #600 he says that would definitely diminish the quality. so we have an ample pool of students. there are some that may not come because there may be a small tuition, but we still have enough students to make a cooper quality class. And that's the aspect of the cooper union that matters. and I can tell you a story about that. I wasn in a panel discussion with the Chancellor of CUNY [Matthew Goldstein]. He told me that he had the opportunity to teach a class at cooper a few years ago, some advanced statistical analysis which he had taught at other places. He came to cooper, taught the class, and gave out a homework assignment. and he came back for the 2nd class fully prepared to go over the homework, which is what he always does for the 2nd class. and the entire class said to him "Just go forward, we got the homework, its ok, go forward." He said it was the only time in his entire teaching career that that's ever happened. He couldn't believe the student body at cooper union was so superior. we're not looking to affect that
EE: And that's great-
ME: And 1 more thing, about having the quality of the students on the table-
EE: As an alum, I'm aware of that. And I think that's the sort of message that needs to get out to other people. And instead-
ME: 1 more thing I want to address. I went to SUNY Stonybrook for 1 year. and then I actually transferred back to cooper (it's a long story). but there at stonybrook, the student body, I lived in a dormitory, some kids made more than others, some were on scholarships, national merit scholarship, some were out of state students who paid more. and nobody gave a thought to who was paying what, they were all equal students. so the fact that you're going to create a different class of students, I don't think that has any merit. Becuase right now we have classes of students in the student body. we have kids who are financial aid kids, we have students who come from families of means. the stories are true. theres a student whose parents had put money away for an education, as a lot of families do, and the student got into coooper union, and the parents were so appreciative that they didnt have to use the money for tuition that they bought a condo in the city for the student to live in. Another story where a woman wrote into the alummni office years ago and she was so appreciative that her son got into cooper union becuase now she was able to put her other son through medical school. so in essence we paid for half the medical school education because otherwise she would have had to split the money between the 2 children. so in 5 years of everyone being the same because theyre all here for nothing, I dont see the merit in that, I dont think it really holds up. its a nice selling argument, but I dont think it adds delivery
EE: I think that applying your experience from decades ago might be slightly different because now the cost of education has skyrocketed as we all know. and so it might matter a little more now than it did in the past, people's backgrounds
ME: Well, Im on the council of board chairs, the AGB, I meet with chairmen from across the country, and this is certainly not a cooper unique problem. all of higher education
EE: Right, and some say that we're the solution-



ME: To get back to the other point, Ill give you a shot, but we issued 1 early admission notice in the art school, the other faculty came up with a plan and we were happy to hear them. and it was very difficult to hear it because that was the meeting when the students crashed into the meeting and disrupted the whole board meeting
EE: If I was there I would have been more respectful, I apologize on their behalf. Im sorry that it happened that way. But I think that it was great they were there and they were able to take notes
ME: Another downside of that, we have these students, all this nonsense in there, and a lot of board members would say "You know what? I don't really feel like donating to educate these people" these students don't realize that this scholarship they're getting is a gift. theyre not entitled to it
EE: They did earn it
ME: What about the 50 students that didnt earn it because they werent lucky enough to get into the top 175? I asked Mitchell how he pulls 175 out of the 225, and he said its very difficult. so Id rather take it away from one of these kids who you just said earned it and give it to another kid who was easily capable of earning it but who appreciated it. I said to a student in November last year (year and a half ago), I asked "What about giving back?" because I had said how poorly the alumni support the school. I said "How about giving back because you just got a ~$150,000 education?" The student actually said to me, "If I have to give something back, then it wasn't a scholarship, it was was a student loan." and I was flabergasted. I said "What about giving forward so that other generations of students could benefit in the same way you did? That's why I gave when I got out of school. You went to school partially because I continued to pay" Not me solely, there were a lot of other people. It didn't dawn on him that maybe they should give back for other generations.
EE: I've heard that before-
ME: Not everybody, there are some students who are very appreciative greatful and Ive met them and they are great. but theres a whole slew of students - and unfortunately most of them are in the art school - The reason the early admission notices were held back was Jamshed told the schools to come up with a plan. He said if we can't come up with a viable plan for sustainability, one of the options is to close the school. each school individually, not the entire cooper union. so this was always on the table, as a potentiality if a plan wasn't developed that would work. because we're not going to keep an unsustainable model going anymore. we can't. the Board has decided we are not going to keep an unsustainable model going anymore. we don't have the leeway to kick the can further down the road, ok. so now the art faculty who was encouraged and they came up with a plan, and now they did an about face and said theres no way they can support tuition for anything, for anybody, at any time. well,... so the option of closing a school was still on the table. we havent decided to close a school or not, but we haven't eliminated that option. And since we haven't eliminated that option, there's no way in the world we can invite anybody to an incoming freshman class in the art school in september.
EE: But the engineering decisions went out
ME: Because the engineering faculty came up with a plan that we could back and support. and we think that will make it a sustainable school
EE: So-
ME: It will include tuition it looks like, and the architecture school came up with a plan. thats why we know that next year we're bringing in an incoming engineering class, and we're bringing in an incoming architecture class. because those schools have plans for sustainability. the art school does not. we're not sure yet if we're going to bring in an incoming class to the art school. very simple. the art faculty i scrambling now becuase they've shot themselves in the foot. and they're nowhere now, it's like they were bluffing. and now the bluff wasn't called. they thought we were going to put tuition on and impose tuition and they could fight it, and they could scream they weren't for it. but we're not going to do that. because if we don't have a plan backed and supported by them, we don't want it. It's unfortunate, I'm a graduate of the art school (I was in all 3 schools at one point but I got a BFA so I'm an alum of the art school). I don't want to see the school close
ME: Does that mean-
EE: I was at a faculty meeting with them a couple of weeks ago because after they sent the letter out, myself and Francois DeMenil the Vice Chairman of the Board, another trustee, we went to a faculty meeting. I wanted to find out more, I wanted to hear first hand from the faculty what took place. not that I dont trust Jamshed, I think Jamshed is great. but I wanted the faculty to be able to speak into my ears. and we were talking about this and they don't realize all the complications of what it means to run a school like this. 


ME: Are you familiar with the school Berea?
EE: Um.. it sounds familiar
ME: Berea is in Kentucky. It's also a free school
EE: Oh yes, its the other one on all those lists, yes
ME: To get into Berea, you have to be poor. If the family makes above a certain income level you can't get in, you can't even apply. It's not like the best school in the country but its a good, its a college for poor kids. But it's not completely free because the students have to work 10 hours a week for the school: either custodial work, clerical work, whatever. one of the faculty members, Im going to leave names out to protect the guilty, but one said "That's a great idea, why don't we do that here?" I said "It is a great idea, but we can't do it here. We have a union, we can't have students or anybody else do jobs that would normally be done by union employees." Thats great idea, maybe it would make the students feel a little closer to the school, maybe they would feel they wanted to give back. One of the problems with students is they have this dilemma, they don't doubt it. they these other schools like Princeton which charges $40-50 a year, they have 60+% of their alumni give back on a regular basis.
EE: Well I mean-
ME: We have 20%
EE: Princeton alumni are pretty well to do, and I think it's a little disconcerting to hear that coming from the Chairman of the Board, comparing us to Princeton when we're not Princeton. And we can make these comparisons
ME: What is disconcerting?
EE: This is the devil's advocate argument coming from the Chairman of the BoT. And you know, I understand that's what some people might say, but I think it's the job of representatives of the school to say "It's a bit of an unfair comparison to compare to Princeton," because its a very specialized school and among specialized schools the alumni participation rate is much lower. And also the income levels of the student body are much different and the diversity of the student body is much different at a place like Princeton
ME: Let me stop you on that point. I didn't say we should have 60% of our students donating $1M each. We know, Im well aware that our student body and our alumni body is not one of high capacity. we turn out great artists, who usually dont make a lot of money. we turn out top architects, architecture is one of the lowest paid licensed professions in the country. so architects dont make a lot of money either. and the engineers who do amazing stuff, geniuses, come out, and Im serious, they do great work but they do it most of the time as employees of corporations and the government. very few become entrepreneurial where they have the ability to write huge checks, Im aware of that. and when I hear an art student tell me that "Im a poor artist, I cant afford to give," I get infuriated because if they put away 40 cents a week thats $20 a year. They're telling me they can't afford it while they're sipping on their starbucks latte, or anything, you know. its just they don't want to pay. everybody has the ability to put away 20 bucks over the course of a year and donate 20 bucks
EE: You're right
ME: I worked the phonathon most years Im in NY, I mean for decades. and to get on the phone and try to get somebody to give 5 dollars. "Why would I do this?" "Just let us count you as a giver, its $5" and they dont. so the argument about our student body not having money, thats nonsense. I hate to be that harsh about it. nobody cant pay $5 over the course of a year, they dont want to give
EE: Theres also the argument which pretty much doubles all the numbers, that we only have contact info for about half of our alumni
ME: How much begging and kissing do you have to do to get a donation from somebody that you gave a full tuition scholarship to? How much begging should be required?
EE: You're right, and I like to think of myself as someone who will donate and continue to donate as much as I can, so I think you're somewhat preaching to the choir here. Im bring up the point that we only have contact information for 50% of our alumni, then the blame kind of goes both ways.
ME: Not every school has 100% contact information, Princeton doesnt. They have more than we do, they have a big alumni staff who are on top of things better, but nobody has 100% as far as I know
EE: I understand
ME: Let's assume we had 100% ok? that means we'll have a 40% giving rate assuming the lost 50% would give at the same rate. thats still pretty good as a giving rate for colleges 30-40% is decent, you know
EE: Right
ME: But still, you're talking about a school where everybody went for free. they don't feel the need or desire, they don't have a legal obligation and they dont have any desire to give any back. its disheartening
EE: Right, and I do have a desire to give back, but I just dont know if Im going to use the Annual Fund because it seems like there are other departments that have told me that they need money for certain things and I feel like thats a better way to get money to the people who need it
ME: Give. But look, you better give something to the annual fund so we can count you as a -now I feel like Im at the phoneathon- give something to the annual fund, give 20 bucks so youre counted as a giver, so that percentage goes up a little. and then make a bigger gift to those good people, you know what Im saying? did you graduate Electrical?
EE: Yes
ME: Theres 2 ways to give, generally. theres unrestricted money that goes to the general pool
EE: Right, Im well aware of what I need to do to give money, and I will probably do that very soon, before any sort of decisions come out
ME: Well Im encouraged to hear that, I thank you for that, its great. You know, part of the thing too with the money, understand not to think just nearly sustainable, you know when the new building was built. Simon Ben-Avi took me for a tour, he took me downstairs to the matrials floor. and they got this great milling machine, Im not sure if they bought it or if it was donated, but it was a really high tech, computer controlled, state of the art milling machine for cutting up stuff
EE: Like a CNC?
ME: They couldnt use it because they didnt have the cutting head and that was $10,000 for a set. and they didnt have that and thats terrible. how do you run a first class school when you dont the money for the proper equipment? Weve been running, oh just cut some money out of your budget to make up the difference. George Campbell made cuts when-
EE: Did he?
ME: He was told by the Board to find ways to cut and he did
EE: I was not aware of that, how did he cut?
ME: Jamshed just did another round of cutting last year, but not much more could be cut
EE: Could you explain how George Campbell cut things?
ME: I dont know the numbers exactly, but I do know that one of them he was asked to cut 10% from the budget
EE: Yes, and-
ME: And I think he achieved more like 5 or 6%
EE: Ok, because the numbers-
ME: I don't have the breakdown of where but those are real numbers
EE: The number that Ive seen, Im aware that the Master Plan said "reduce expenses by 10% every year," but that was one of the components (like all of them) that didnt meet its goal, and the budget increased by 10% every year. So feel free to correct me on that if you have other numbers
ME: Well, they cut, and maybe there was an increase in the overall budget but if you didnt have the cuts maybe it would have been a 15% increase instead of a 10% increase. so that counts as a 5% cut
EE: Oh, ok
ME: It might not go on the very bottom line but there were cuts. so we were looking for 10% but he was only able to achieve about 5


EE: Ok, so when I hear-
ME: When you have unions you cant just go fire people, and tenured professorships, you cant just let go of tenured professors
EE: We cant anymore
ME: Its very hard
EE: Because, I mean, that was what happened in the 70s and thats part of the reason why we have the unions. 
ME: That may be so, I dont remember the all the reasons but Ill take your word on it
EE: The Physics Department was dissolved, and they fired all the tenured faculty, and I believe thats why the unions formed because "we cant let this happen to us"
ME: Well, no, if thats the case then it didnt really change because one of the ways you can eliminate tenured faculty is if you close an entire department. thats 1 of the grounds for eliminating tenured professors today. so if they unionized to prevent that I dont think they got what they were looking for
EE: Well I think they made it harder to... it made sense at the time, Im sure. I can sympathize with why they would have a union after dealing with an episode like that
ME: Unions have a purpose, my father was a union member so Im not anti union. I have unions in my print shop and that went well. I used to be in the printing business...taken over a couple of companies and if they unionized I sort of took the unions in with them. and we have a good relationship. and because I had paid the regular employees...paid dues for benefits. so Im not looking to get rid of the union rights, unionize my existing staff
EE: But I think there has been a concern that union negotiations have stalled from, and its been from the administration side walking away, for years now
ME: Well they have a contract now, the faculty union contract I think expires in august of this year. You know its funny, at the faculty meeting a couple of weeks ago "Well if we cut the school, cut the budget to what we could afford?" the schools running a $60M budget, you know a $15M deficit, lets run a $45M budget
EE: I think thats a great idea
ME: And I said "Thats a great idea," were talking about $60M to $40M, and I did not point out that $10M of that is debt service. so we wouldnt really be talking about 60 to 40, were really talking about cutting the schools educational aspects from 50 to 30 because theres still the $10M debt service that change. "So ok, were cutting from 60 to 40, a third of the school, theres 12 faculty members in the room, which 4 of you are going to walk away?" And there were too many non tenured faculty "so ok, fine, which 3 of you will walk away?" after they corrected me from 12 to 9, and nobody said anything. nobody put up their hand and volunteered. and I ponted out that the last union go around, that the benefits package that the faculty has is very generous. and now I want to say to you, Im not union bashing, Im not negotiating, Im just talking facts. the union package they have is extremely generous by any standard. they have low copays for medical. in todays world of benefits packages with the world the way it is. at the last go around with the contract, they were asked to give back, to start paying a little bit of copay when they go to a doctors visit. and the battles that took place over that copay were astronomical. I said to them "So now youre telling me youre going to willingly give up all sorts of benefits because were bringing down the budget?" It sounds nice, its a nice theory, but practically I dont see it happening. no ones going to be walking away, no ones going to take a salary cut willingly, thats the reality. its theory versus reality
EE: The accounts that Ive heard-
ME: I asked them and nobody did it. any volunteers?
EE: I havent witnessed this, but the accounts that Ive heard have said that the faculty unions have come to the table and said "Ok, we realize things need to change" and then the admin has left them hanging. but again, I cant really verify that, its just what Ive heard. negotiations have stalled and it hasnt been the faculty



ME: everybody wants something but nobody wants change. thats the reality of it. what happened at the meeting, I was at the faculty meeting for 2 and a half hours, and after about the first 45 minutes to an hour trying to talk about the plan, why did they change their mind, then the decided to just go on "Well, youve just got to raise more money. well work with the development department, well get students to help." I said again "Its a nice theory, but weve been trying to get students to participate in the phoneathon for decades." I used to be president of the alumni association, I know from what I see. very few have participated in any way, shape, or form. alumni come, faculty rarely show up to help out. now everyones going to jump on the bandwagon? I doubt it, it doesnt work out. I said "It sounds good, but what would you do the same and what would be different?"
EE: On the issue of fundraising-
ME: And I said at the meeting twice "Lets go back and try to find out how we can get sustainable, because just raising more money is not going to do it. were not going to be able to raise enough money through development" its going to be a multifaceted plan. obviously beefing up development as much as possible is part of that, but thats not the 1 thing. and I was recently talking to an attorney who has dealt with these kinds of issues, and he almost laughed when I told him about this. Im not just saying that for emphasis, Im telling you straight up, he said "Of all the organizations youve worked for, but particularly art programs like city ballets, a number of symphony orchestras that have closed, its always the same story: all the people just say to the trustees 'Well you just have to raise more money'" Now we have the issue and its the same thing. Thats why the engineers and the architects came up with plans. nobodys happy about having tuition as a means for
EE: In fact they did not vote for it
ME: You dont know. But the Board does not have the luxury of not voting for it. The Board cant just say "thats your problem" to anybody else and say "you fix it, you go raise more money, and tell me when you have a cure" The Board, its a buck stops here kind of thing. Thats a luxury, its cavalier, we have to make sure the bills get paid



EE: I can respond a couple of ways, one of them is that I think in the early history of the school, the trustees just sort of took care of any operating deficit. 
ME: Yea
EE: So theres an argument that the school was never really sustainable if it started off that way
ME: Well the school was always, it was like the holiest of holies to try and sustain. always, yes, in the early 1900s theres 5 Gentlemen of New York: David Lewis[??], JP Morgan... their schedule, divide it by 5, and pay it off, yes. so that was sustainable on its own funds, Peter Cooper didnt leave enough money for that to happen, so what happened in the early 1900s, the Chrystler Building kicked in, Carnegie gave $600k, thats when the school figured out: "Ok, we have enough assets to generate enough income that nobody has to pay tuition" Thats when the "free as air and water" came
EE: See, I disagree with that because the Engineering School has never charged tution
ME: Um.. The Cooper Union has charged tuition
EE: Right, but the Engineering School has never charged tuition, and now that is being talked about for the first time
ME: Well, not the first time, weve-
EE: Its going to be voted on for the first time



ME: When they started the Masters program, it was always intended that tuition would be charged. 
EE: For engineering or for architecture?
ME: We didn't get around to it, but it was always part of the mix. when we started the Architecture Graduate Program a couple of years ago, it was always the intention that eventually tuition would be charged for them
EE: For architecture or also for engineering?
ME: No, the Engineering Graduate Program started back in the 60s, very small. the architecture only started a few years ago.
EE: Right, and Ive heard that before that the architecture masters program, it was our first experiment, sort of, in this "Hey, lets see if we can get people to pay for a Masters at Cooper" and not many people applied. and then we sort of-
ME: I think they got to 10 or something like that. This was seeing if they could attract people, they started for first years, experimenting to see. But the intention was always then that it would be somewhat..?
EE: Right, so has there been any learning from the mistakes of that, or what
ME: Well, because they think they can ramp that up and bring in more people. Part of the plan of the architecture school is to actually cut down a little bit on the size of the undergraduate class, so they could have more room for the graduate students. Thats a plan that the architecture faculty came up with.
EE: Right, well thats a little tough to hear and I would probably feel worse about that if I was an architecture alum, but-



ME: Partially so, but you know its funny because we had a conversation recently with some people associated with online education groups. you know, we look at everything, the Board, its our responsibility to look at everything so we asked people from the online education community to see if that should be part of Coopers future or what
EE: Minerva?
ME: So someone from 1 of the organizations, he was asked point blank "How is this going to affect traditional education?" and his answer, very matter of factly, very honestly, he said "Any new technology is going to be disruptive, theres going to be collateral damage." Thats a realist point of view, a realist attitude of what takes place. So at Cooper Union, theres going to be disruptions becuase its essentially going the same way, we cant kick the can down the road anymore. And theres going to be some collateral damage. Exactly what that is, I dont know yet. And as I said, the art school if plan didnt come up thats sustainable and ongoing, and they said that they had to be closed down, if that option cant be taken off the table, well theres some collater damage for you. I dont mean to be cavaleir about this, its factual stuff. everyones entitled to their adorable language, I dont like it, but the reality is Im entitled to my opinion and so are you if you dont like it, but the facts are if theres not enough money to keep it going, it cant continue. if this was a business, because you know its a school its not a business. its a school its not a business,..
EE: Yes, and I believe that
ME: But what happens in life, if youre not taking care of your business, youre going to be closed. its not[??] its losing money, its draining enough from the company thats
EE: This is a nonprofit though
ME: I know, I know, but still if its draining the rest of the school, if we dont have to pay money that would be going to the benefits to pay for the engineering school or the architecture school. to support an unsustainable art school, theyre doing a disservice to the architecture students and and engineering students. Heres another quesetion, there are certain factors that make cooper, through the years. 1 is of course the full tuition scholarship, no question about that. the other is an academically excellent institution, ok. now, we know we cant continue both forever. so I propose to you, which do you want to give up? What do you want have happen to those kids? Do you want to turn it into a completely free, mediocre institution? Or do you want to keep it acedemically excellent that everybody wants to get into, but those who could afford it pay a little bit?
Thats the lecture of the evening
EE: But-
ME: Theres a theory in business negotiations, that youre negotiating the deal, and if both parties walk away from the table completely unhappy, you know youve got a deal. its a fair deal. and thats where we're at. no ones walking away from this happy. but the reality is we have to deal with this. were not going to shove it and push it off to another board or another administration. doing what trustees in the past should have done, especially back in the 70s


60:00
EE: Can I ask, how much money do we expect to make from the PILOT on 51 Astor when that get running?
ME: About $2M a year. you know, as a matter of fact theres the condo building on the parking lot side, were gettig about $2M a year on that too. originally, we were supposed to be getting about $4M from each of those buildings
EE: And it moved to 50%, yes
ME: The city attacked that, ok, and we had to negotiate to get 50% of those 2 buildings. the Chrystler Building we dont have to give up anything. This is what Im talking about, people, politicians are always trying to get that tax to the taxpayers. and in that case we were advised by attorneys not to fight it, negotiate. because we could have fought it and lost everything
EE: It makes sense, and something like that is definitely important because that does increase with inflation, that does scale in the future, in perpetuity, and all that. I feel like theres enough, this might be wishful thinking, but I feel like it could be possible to run a school on the PILOT payments from the Chrystler Building and from all the other real estate. And I think that should be where we focus on. If you look at the budget of the engineering school, and the budget of the architecture, and the budget of the art school, and compare that to all of the PILOT payments, all of the real estate revenue, I feel like theres a push in the community to sort of start at those basics. and then build from there
ME: Well, what are you going to cut, what are you going to cut? If you want to talk about running the school, the idea of running the school we can afford with the income we have now has come up. and thats sort of like what the art faculty has said.[??] But I dont think you could run a school, that you would want The Cooper Union to be, on that small of a budget. What do you want, do you want to keep it as great as it could possibly be, but you could only afford it for 10 students? youve got to find a-
EE: I feel thats basically what we have now
ME: In the 80s or 90s, we cut the student body to try to find a way to save costs. and it turns out that most of the costs are fixed, and cutting the student body didnt save anything. but the downside was, we now for those years have churned out less alumni who might support the school in the future. we were actually killing alumni support measures by cutting the student body


EE: Is there any hope for a sort of rotating idea, of deferring or not admitting from 1 school and sort of rotate around so that theres always 3 years of students?
ME: What do you mean, deffering of what?
EE: Defer was the wrong word, but if you dont have an admissions cycle for 1 year and then alternate each school. so that for example, you admit from engineering and architecture for 1 year, and then admit architecture and art for 1 year, and then engineering and art 1 year. eventually it gets to a state where there are 3 classes in each school. Is that a way to downsize without reducing the classes below a critical mass?
ME: Theres so many, part of the issue is not just the tenured faculty which you wouldnt be able to change under that scenario. but you have the lab technicians and the IT people and librarians, you wouldnt end up with a big cash savings from that, cutting costs by doing that
EE: Right, ok, so that isnt really being considered then
ME: Maybe you could hire a few less adjunct professors, but they dont make a lot of money in the scope of things
EE: Oh yea, and we know that adjuncts get paid crap at cooper. for all the ways to reduce expenses, adjuncts are not the answer. because they could easily, theyre doing the school a service by coming. so many of them are alumni who come to teach, thats their way of donating because they would be paid for their time much more anywhere else
ME: Well you know adjuncts dont make tons of money. but the thing is we dont have that large... in the architecture school, we have 2 full time faculty.
EE: And one is on sabbatical



ME: In the art school theres 9 full time faculty. we dont have a huge full time faculty, most of the teaching is done by adjuncts. Thats not the cost, the fixed costs are whats very hard to cut. We have to maintain the building, we have to have custodial staff, office people, development teams, alumni staff, that stuff doesnt get cut by cutting the number of students
EE: So is there any way to cut those sorts of things? Because the administrative budget is close to 50% of the budget
ME: If you look at our numbers compared to other schools, and when you include the support staff for education, the deans, the lab techs, [??]taking care of the organization[??] when you include all the costs that actually go to education, rather than administration, our numbers are high compared to other institutions
EE: Ok, so lab-
ME: The fact that we're a school of schools only makes our administrative costs amortize out to more per student, compared to other places where more students having to pay more teachers who are adjuncts and administration didnt really have the [??], so now youd have a much smaller percentage of administrators. the fact that were a small school impacts that negatively
EE: But right now we should be able to do more with less. And can I just- you said that administrative costs also include support for each school like lab techs and everything
ME: No, no, not just the top. in order to manage the cost of pure administrators on education, and the lab techs are all part of the educational costs not the administration. apples to apples if you look at other schools the same way, the administrative costs are not that out of line, or out of line at all, we actually do better than a lot of schools which have a higher percentage of administrative costs
EE: But I think thats something we really need to see and look more into, how do you split up these administrative costs, because trying to look at the numbers, the Expense Reduction Task Force put out numbers that basically say "administrative budget is 50%" and theres no granularity there. theres no way to split it up between support staff and educational costs
ME: Well [??], it depends on what category youre putting it in. In particular, if take a few lab techs, if you dont put them on the educational side of the line, then theyre [??] without having a really accurate count
EE: Exactly, and people have been looking for that accurate count for a year and a half
ME: Well, the numbers have been transparent via, TC and Jamshed have held dozens, dozens of small group seminars of folks, meeting to go through the numbers
EE: The 990s, or actual numbers?
ME: As an administrator, Im not an administrator, but TC is such a valuable employee of the school. having to- dont take offense to the term- but waste so much of her time repeating the same stuff over and over and over again because people just dont want to see what it is, in a sense. because she has better things to do with her limited amounts of time
EE: Well, theres a difference between going through the 990s and going through the actual budget
ME: We had a webinar. Ron Weiner, trustee, a year ago or so, he did a webinar. Hes was a CPA, he owns a big firm in new york, and devoted a lot of time into the webinar. for all those 12 years of financials, whatever it was, any questions that anybody had. and then what? [??] Eventually we decided that we have to stop. Again, you cant convince people who are working on their own facts. impossible. They dont want to listen to the real facts
that dispute their made up facts. You cant talk to them, its unfortunate. The Board, most of us are businesspeople, theyre successful people. we have committees, the reinvention committee, theres the revenue task force. these are not [??] no ones come up with a solution to solve our problem, there is none.
EE: Other than everyone just writing checks, but thats not sustainable
ME: Well, it would be great if everybody wrote checks, but its not going to happen. again, thats the difference between theory and reality. if every person paid for $1000 a year, wed be doing ok. but theyre not going to do it



EE: A lot of what Ive seen as far as fundraising is that people dont want to donate to a black hole or a black box. you gave a good example about about the drill bit on the CNC machine. thats something that people can get behind. but when you say "give to the annual fund," or "we lost all this money, but give us some more," then I think thats a huge disconnect
ME: Well heres the thing with fundraising, it involves other nonprofit organizations. people dont give you money because you need money, simple as that. thats not why you get money. people give you money because they either want to feel good about it, they want to support a particular thing (like they want you to teach something, so they give you money for a chair)... people wanted to pay for the new academic building, we raised $60M in the capital campaign.... we raised a bunch of money on the alumni roof terrace, naming the tiles.
and the alumni walk going down to the rose auditorium. people pay to get their names in there. even in the rose auditorium, look at the back of the seats. there are plaques with peoples names on them
EE: Right, but its not enough?
ME: Thats what people pay for, its not "I want a seats for the great hall, can you give me money for the great hall?" "No!" "If I put your name on it, will you give me money?" then "Well, ok!" Thats how you raise money. We dont have enough people, again we dont have a very wealthy alumni body. Lets say we triple our giving, we were getting 60% of our alumni giving, then if theres ~$2M instead theres $7M. I mean, last year was a record, that might be unsustainable, lets say we made $9M. thats still not closing the deficit, thats with a $6M difference. Even if the alumni giving, increased participation, its still not enough to make a 5 year difference. it could make a sizeable difference, but that kind of development is not being met. Its hard [??] Thats why we have development. One of the things during my term, that I and the Board pushed for, over past administrations, was development [??] Because before that, development was under the umbrella of Ronni Denes who was the VP of General Affairs and she was in charge of development, external affairs, alumni relations, event planning [??] How could you not have a VP of Development? It was budgetary
EE: I feel like those are all important and all related. and I feel like one of the concerns of development is then "How do we get these alumni numbers up" when development is more than that. is seeking the philanthropic community and the country
ME: The current VP of development, he came from columbia where he put a well oiled money making machine together. he came in and he saw that the efforts at cooper union was not sufficient. so we couldnt always fire people, but we were able to slowly through attrition (some people left, retired) we were able to hire people better suited for that work. and the goal of it, the idea of it was not to throw money at development and then cash starts flowing in, development is about cultivation. you have to cultivate little by little. another point that you make is the fact that the alumni association was in charge of the annual fund, as opposed to being part of the usual development process. but what happened, so where we are now, as in most institutions, your big donors-its usually older people, who were at some point alumni like you- who decide today to donate big checks, so they try, they usually start off as annual fund givers. and then theres a slow transition to get them to increase their annual fund through the years. then eventually, if they have the wherewithal, and the inclination, then they become major donors. its a smooth transition. at cooper it was always that the annual fund was looking for $100, $500, $1000 gift. and then there was a different arm, the development office, trying to get major donors, major gifts, without having that smooth transition from annual fund giver to major donor so[??]
EE: I think that that makes sense, actually. I think that fits the model of cooper a little better. its that yes you have these alumni who have a very small chance of becoming major donors, and then you also have the big philanthropists, and youre able to court them in a completely different way and you have to tailor your message
ME: Well we have a number of cooper people who do make major gifts. theres definitely some of them...[??] look the largest devotion from a group of alumni that we have through the years is from the alumni from the late 40s. because most of the people were guys who came out of the service after WWII and they had families and if they didnt get into coopers night school (they had the 6 year engineering program at night), they would not get an education, they had to work... They understood what they got, this is what they were able to build their lives from. and they are always the most supportive group of donors. the highest percentage of from donors in those years for someone whose financials could support it. 

ME: You went to the Albert Nerkin School of Engineering, right? 
EE: Yes
ME: Al Nerkin donated $7M to the school back when it was named after him. he started an engineering company, sold his company for $21M, and he donated 7 of it to cooper union. [??] theres not a lot of them, probably not enough of them. and there are donors in the $100k zone
EE: Thats great, and I think that part of this is that the really successful alumni turn into trustees and donate that way, which is great
ME: Yes, there are those who have given money and were glad that they did that. there was a woman art graduate who donated $1M to the school ... [??] she was a well known artist... so I asked her in the alumni office "How did you decide to give $1M?" I didnt want to get too personal but I was curious. and the answer I got was "she divorced for it" she got left a bunch of money, and she felt like giving $1M to the school because she appreciated what she got. its a great story. she didnt want to be on the board, she didnt want to have her say. some people say "Ill give you a million dollars, but I want you to do this and this," she was just giving from the heart because she appreciated what she got here
EE: I think thats great, thats the sort of donating that we need. One thing thats never really made sense to me is that with so many famous art alumni the school of art is still not named
ME: They want to name it. Chanin, from the Chanin School of Architecture, was not an alum. he gave $2M and they named the school. theres a price tag on the art school [??if they want to name it when theyre still alive??] $25M
EE: So even then-
ME: The new academic building is not named, that was like a $35M price tag
EE: So would those not be enough to close any sort of gap?
ME: No, no.
EE: Not sustainable?
ME: Were running a $15M a year deficit. It changes every year because of return on investment affects the bottom line, but lets say $15M
EE: Ok, because Ive hear a lot of numbers. I remember hearing 18 and then the new york times just said 12 this week
ME: Its averaging it out. the number is hard to pin down because its always changing...[??] so if the market goes down and you take a snapshot of what its worth, then it went down and we just lost a lot more money, add to the deficit. it the next day you take the snapshot and the market might be high that day. so its not a real hard number. over time it averages out and you know you have a real deficit


EE: Shifting gears a little bit back to development, we said that theres this new strategy for development. and we want to see if this works, cultivating alumni into becoming larger donors, right?
ME: Right
EE: And so I guess the big argument there is that sort of strategy takes time and that we shouldnt expect immediate results. the way that I see things, if this strategy isnt working we should change things, we should go back to what we did before, we should do something different. we should hold these things accountable as far as return on investment
ME: Well, everybody can debate over really that when you start development, the cultivation process takes time. you dont go to somebody, knock on their door, and walk away with a check for $1M. it doesnt happen [??] come tour the building, its a whole cultivation process. and then [??maybe you can ask] 
EE: How many people have visited the school?
ME: We get a number of visitors, and we try to get more all the time. we occasionally get new Board members. also, through our history, since the first few decades of J.P. Morgan, the Board was never really selected for their giving capacity. we just recently instituted a recommended minimum giving for trustees per year. [??] and the new trustees were bringing on are informed early on that "this is what youre expected to give, as a member"
EE: I think that makes sense, and I commend the Board for that
ME: Other places, the board makes the initiative. all of a sudden we need $100M, the board says "ok, well kick it off with $20M or $50M." we dont have a Board with that capacity. So were interested in making sure that at a minimum, they need to give
EE: Ok, that makes sense. Definitely a minimum at this-



ME: Were trying every way we can. For me, honestly, its an honor to be Chairman of the Board. I have so much respect for the Board members, theyre great. theyre successful, theyre smart, and their hearts are in the right place. and when I hear them being bashed by people in the cooper community, I think "Youre yelling at people who are donating their time, their expertise, their money. theyre trying to help the school." and theyre calling them names and giving them nonsense. Im surprised that Board members havent walked away from it
EE: I think part of the reason, from an outside point of view, I can tell that theres not much continuity. theyre sort of this nebulous group of people, some leave, some enter, but theyres no way to account for whos still on the board from 10 years ago. and whos responsible for the new building and whos gone, whos still there, and whos new. And so I think thats an issue that needs to be raised
ME: Boards at all places are a rotating body. there are term limits, we actually just shortened our term limits. we talked to an expert on proper governance who said our term limits are too long. so we shortened them as much as we can
EE: But do you understand my point?
ME: The Board revolves,... We recently had some Board members leave, and we recently added new Board members. and we have a couple more in the pipeline now that might on be later in the year. One member moved out of town, to Canada, whats he going to do, travel back and forth? Some move out of town and can no longer devote the time. and we just added 2 more, one is a cooper alum and another is the daughter of an alum. we have a few Board members whose parents went to cooper union
EE: I think its very important for people to know that and for that information to be available, but the best that people have been able to do is just look at the website cooper.edu/trustees and just watch the list change. thats the only notice people have about whos on the board and whos not. how we can contact people, how we can welcome people who are coming in, I think thats something that needs to change. and if we talk about openness and transparency in governance, I think thats a great place to start. "Here are the trustees," and then if people leave or are added to make an account of that somewhere
ME: I believe theyre all listed on the website, the Board hasnt been hiding. How much information can you put out in anticipation of what people might want to know? all the information that weve been talking about has always been out in the open
EE: Right, but theres no-



ME: If youre hearing accusations about mismanagement, let me tell you something. cooper unions investment portfolio is managed so well by the investment committee, that when the financial crisis hit (this was in the newspaper) and harvard lost 36% of their endowment- We work with a group called Cambridge Associates, a group that monitors and works with endowments, like ~400 endowments. they said "We would place you in the best or 2nd best performing endowment weve ever seen." we took a smaller hit than anybody else. I think we lost like 18%
EE: But we all know that was because of the change in accounting principle where we now count where now the value of the chrystler building is now thrown into the endowment. because the the $500M chrystler building was static, the $600M endowment didnt fluxuate much because a large chunk of that was the chrystler buildings fair value
ME: Also a big part of it was at the time, we had a lot of the money in cash when the investment banks took a hit. whatever reason, as one of the Board members said that you cant spend relative to [??]. we lost money. you know, our investment policy has always been to be extremely conservative. because we know we cant afford to lose money. even with extremely conservative policies, we were getting great returns. If I had millions and millions of dollars to invest, Id want the cooper union investment committee to handle my money
EE: So there were no hedge funds or any-
ME: We have great people on there
EE: I though that there were hedge funds and we got caught up in the market, you know, as you just said the market was doing well and then the market tanked
ME: Yea, well thats what kept cooper union alive for a long time. so to come back now and say becuase the world collapsed and we took a hit, to say it was the wrong investment strategy at the time, it doesnt hold water with me. when we were losing, you know, the deficit and getting 20% returns on our money (or whatever we were getting at the time) when things were good. to tell me that was a failed investment. had I known that would happen, we would be charging tuition 10 years ago. in all reality, knowing as much as I know about whats taking place and what took place, and where we stand, the only mistake that was made (if any mistake was made) was that tuition was not instituted earlier. I was against tuition, all along every time it was brought up I said "no, no, theres got to be another way," just like [??]. but now weve reached a point where I [??] enough evidence that theres really no other way where we can go on having a school that we want to support
EE: So does that mean-
ME: I have enough information and enough facts, and its blind luck that we havent implemented it already
EE: So fundraising efforts to the contrary are-



ME: Im hoping to hear if you have a way- 1 of the things when I see people, I ask "what decisions did we think would fail," because if I did everyone would say "what terrible decisions, terrible decisions," but when I ask people, no ones really been able to point out to me the terrible decision that was made that should have been different
EE: Well-
ME: So let me ask you, what is the terrible decision
EE: We can talk all day about that, I mean the building of the new building after we fell short on the capital campaign and after the faculty voted against it. it seems like going back in time if I was on the BoT, I would have not done that I would have listened to the faculty who voted against building it and realized that we dont have enough money to build a new building and would not have done it. I would have used that money elsewhere
ME: Ok, where would that have left us? do you want me to tell you?
EE: Yes
ME: First of all, the new building basically paid for itself. if we didnt build the new building, we would not have sold the ground lease on the engineering building. we would not have gotten ~$97M from that. we got $60M from the capital campaign. the naming opportunities in the new building, and also in the foundation building. I actually bought the naming opportunity for the clock in the Peter Cooper Suite
EE: I actually saw that one time when I was up there
ME: Other trustees were like "Howd you get that" "well, you snooze you lose." Anyhow, the $2M a year on the building [??] on the engineering building site with a 5% return that places ~$40M in the endowment. thats additional money we would not be getting if we didnt build the new building. so we have $90M from the sale of the property, $60M cash in naming opportunities, and we got the equivalent of $40M in the endowment. the building payed for itself. 
EE: But the $40M-
ME: Had we kept the engineering buildling and the hewitt building, those 2 buildings together were going to need 10s of millions of dollars in improvements. if you remember the hewitt building, the thing stunk
[??] the foundation started sinking, they ran out of money, for whatever reason they put a roof on 2nd floor of a 3 story building and that was the hewitt building. it was completely not apa compliant, [??] The engineering building, which was built in the 50s and 60s, didnt have room for air conditioners [??] We recently had to spend ~15M to fix up the foundation building. those are things that you have to do when you own property, they have to be maintained. so we wouldnt have gotten the naming opportunity money, we wouldnt have gotten additional tax revenues for those sites, chances are we would have been [??broke] already. The building, contrary to popular belief, did not hurt us
EE: But the tax revenue from the sale of the engineering building, thats not enough to help us, right?
ME: Well, its $2M a year that we were not getting if we had not built the new building. A friend of mine has a great line, "A million dollars here, a million dollars there, pretty soon youre talking about real money." so I dont want to say "only a million dollars" because it adds up


EE: Ok, so I dont want to dwell on this list, but the other one having to do with the building was recruiting a starchitect Thom Mayne when were perfectly capable of having alumni come in at- I imagine when John Hejduk rennovated the Foundation Building in the 70s, he didnt charge market rate, or whatever Thom Mayne charged to build the New Building
ME: Well [??abraham] build the dormatory- put it this way: there was no architect from cooper union who was willing to donate their services to build the new building. and if you look at the total cost per square foot of the building (the building, the architects, everything), it was roughly $150-160M. overall design, could a cheaper building have been built? yes, but that wouldnt stop our problems. if we saved $50M off the cost of the building, if that was possible, thats another $50M in the endowment. we could continue on living [??] but not enough to solve our problems
EE: But any money thats not being depleted from the endowment compounds. its 1 thing to say we could have more in the endowment, but 



ME: But its not a single cure for our problems. I just said to you I dont want to say $1M doesnt count. it counts, but its clearly not enough. we have to take a $1M from this and $2M from that and it has to add up to $15M, and then were ok. but we dont have all those other elements. thats why the schools were asked to come up with [??money] $6M for engineering, $3M for art, and $2M for architecture. you add those up, you get $11-12M
EE: What is the role of an administration when each school is self sufficient like that?
ME: Theres administrative staff
EE: If each school is bringing in its own money through all these programs, then is there still a reason
ME: Theyre bringing in enough money to close the deficit. theres still a lot of other money, the rest of it. the budget is $60M. if you eliminate the debt, we run it at $50M. were asking them to bring in $12M. Theres still $13M that the administration is responsible for ponying up. theres development efforts, theres endowment return, theres the chrystler building. in the 20s and 30s [??], the chrystler building basically paid for everything. thats why there was no tuition
EE: Right
ME: the costs have gone up so rapidly, not just at the cooper union but around the country in higher education, and the rent stream from and taxes the chrystler building cant keep up. its roughly 1/3 of our budget now instead of 100%
EE: Yes, so I think theres cause for expense reduction if thats the case
ME: Expenses were cut, george [campbell] cut expenses. he had trouble cutting as much as we wanted. jamshed implemented anouther round of cuts. we cant cut our programs, we cant cut back on mowing our lawns and taking care of the grounds because he have none. [??] theres not a lot of extraneous places to cut money. the administration is not that overly staffed. development is not overly staffed. TC has a list of things they would like to get if we had the money, but were still in debt [??]


EE: So Ill bring up 1 example, online registration that theyre trying now this year. we never had online registration when I attended. in my head I think that means "ok, if we are investing in this online registration, then shouldnt we be able to layoff staff and be able to remove their job functions which are now being replaced with a computer?"
ME: If Im not mistaken, didnt faculty do a lot of work on registration stuff?
EE: No, it was all admissions and registrar
ME: The work on admissions stuff, so I dont know how much of - you know why we never had online registration before? and why we have it now?
EE: It was too small scale to make sense?
ME: No, because the computer system that the school had was recently replaced. and they put in a really good system. when its fully up and running, which should be soon (it takes time), we should be able to schedule classrooms to get the most out of them. in the old engineering building, those classrooms were considered part of the mechanical engineering school, and unless there was a mechE class taking place... each department had their own turf. theres no turf in the NAB, except for labs. so the classrooms dont belong to anyone. now they can be scheduled so... you hear that when we lost the engineering building and hewitt buildings we lost square footage
EE: So then it doesnt make sense to have a plan for expansion when we lose space
ME: It wasnt to expand, but let me get back the initial point. the computer system was changed at a very big expense. I was initially against spending that money




|||||||||||||||||||||

[end of converstion]
ME: Everything Im telling you today, I can back up [??] These are not made up facts these are facts. not my facts, these are facts for everyone  
EE: Yes, youre telling it like it is, telling your opinions and your facts, and I appreciate it
ME: And when its an opinion I tell you its an opinion, have I done that?
EE: Yes, you have
ME: You dont have to agree with my opinions, but youve got to agree with my facts, because theyre the real ones
EE: Right. I really need to get going. 
ME: Any other questions?
EE: I think this is it for now. Thank you, you definitely answered a lot of my questions
ME: I dont want to hear people telling me they have no access, ok?
EE: Right, and I appreciate it. would you be ok if I told people about this, what you said here?
ME: Absolutely, I wish you would
EE: Great, because I think people really need to know where you come from and your opinions on these sorts of things, and your facts and setting the record straight. If I have any other questions, can I email-
ME: Anything else, you can contact me
